THE DRIFTING CLOUD

[Ukigumo, II,7. 1888] by Futabatei Shimei (1864-1909)



The Drifting Cloud, written 1887-1889, is the first modern Japanese novel
both in subject matter and style: it deals mainly with young Japanese
educated under the new “enlightenment,” and it is written in a colloquial
style very close to the actual conversation of the time. The chief character—
he can hardly be called the hero—is Utsumi Bunzō, a hapless young man
who loses his job in the Civil Service because he does not toady to his
superiors. His aunt Omasa, in whose house he lives, at first wishes to marry
her daughter Osei to him, but when he loses his job she shows him only
contempt. Osei, a superficially “enlightened” girl, proud of her education
and Western ideas, turns from Bunzō to the aggressive sycophant Honda
Noboru, the up-and-coming Meiji bureaucrat par excellence. The novel is full
of vivid and amusing scenes which depict life in the eighties in Japan with a
sharpness that borders at times perhaps on caricature. We can only regret
that this unprecedented novel was never completed. The following excerpt
occurs at a point where Oset is beginning to be won by the blandishments of
Noboru.


THE STORY: 


Sunday was a brilliantly clear day, the likes of which they had not seen in a
long while. The wind was gentle and not a particle of dust stirred. It was the
second of November, the beginning of the “month of chrysanthemums”
according to the old calendar, and ideal weather for pleasure seekers.
   The members of the household had been busy since morning with
preparations for the excursion to view the chrysanthemums. Osei fretted so
over the fit of her finery that she quite got on Omasa’s nerves. The
hairdresser’s tardiness in arriving, which precipitated another crisis, was
naturally enough blamed on the maid. Finally, in rapid succession, a teapot
passed down from remote antiquity acquired a harelip with which it had not
been born, an earthenware mortar firmly placed on a shelf ran away all by
itself, and, just when everything was in a state of the extremest confusion, an
unfortunate visitor, one notorious as a long stayer, appeared. They attempted
to lay as much emphasis as they could on the words “We’re leaving in just a
few minutes for Dangosaka,” but these had no more effect than the remedies
of the most arrant quack. The visitor settled down with utter self-possession
to a lengthy chat, with an air of being permanently installed. What a dreadful
nuisance! Nevertheless they did as duty required, and the danger passed more
easily than expected. Hardly had the visitor left—which eventually did
occur—than the hairdresser arrived. The preparations for the excursion were
duly completed and by eleven the household had at length calmed down.
Occasionally one even heard loud peals of laughter.
  Bunzō, the man of misfortune and woe, had nothing about him of
chrysanthemum-viewing. If we could compare Noboru to the cherry
blossoms in the pride of their springtime flowering, Bunzō resembled, rather,
a withered cattail in the shade. He had decided that if there was nothing he
could do to oppose the excursion, he would at least not let himself be
humiliated by it. He chose to let circumstances take their course and give
himself the airs of a martyr. The day before yesterday when Noboru invited
him along, he had resolved to refuse outright. Since then, he had maintained
a detached calm which suggested that whether people were excited or not
was a matter of as little concern to him as the neighbor’s colic. But he was
inwardly not quite equal to this feigned tranquillity. Everything he saw or
heard, always with the same expression of serene pleasure on his face, of the
others’ excitement served to remind him again of his happiness of yesterday,
and he sighed, his spirits damp as the sky in May. Which was not very
enjoyable.
  No, it was not enjoyable. When yesterday Osei asked Bunzō if he were
going, he had replied that he was not. To which she had said in the coolest
possible tone, “Oh, really?”—which was not enjoyable. Bunzō felt that if she
wanted him to go she should have coaxed him. And if he remained obstinate
and still would not go, she should have said something like, “Unless I can go
with you, I won’t go at all.”
  “But I am not jealous,” he suddenly recalled, and tried to rationalize his
mood to himself. But he still felt a tickling sensation of uneasiness.
  He didn’t want to go, he didn’t want to stay at home either, and this
dilemma put him in a bad humor. He was angry, although at no one in
particular. He could not sit still, but kept jumping up as though he had
remembered some urgent business, only to decide that he hadn’t. He could
not seem to quiet down, no matter what he did.
  Bunzō thought he might be able to distract himself with a little reading, and
took the first book from his shelf that came to hand. He tried reading, but it
brought no distraction whatsoever. He glowered at the volume with a peevish
expression as if he were trying to outstare the page. The book was not a bad
one, but no matter how many times he read and reread the opening lines of
the first chapter he could not make any sense out of it. With maddening
clarity, on the other hand, he could hear Osei’s laughter in the downstairs
parlor, and once this sound had taken possession of his ears, it would not go
away for quite some time. With an angry click of his tongue Bunzō threw
away the book, angrily leaned against his desk, angrily propped his head on
his hand, angrily glared at nothing in particular. ... Struck by a sudden
thought he stood up, a look of resuscitation on his face.
  “Maybe they’ll call the whole thing off ...” he murmured. But he came to
himself at once and clamped his mouth shut in consternation. He felt
surprised, bewildered, and finally desperate. “Damn you!” he said, shaking
his fists in self-intimidation. But the mischievous worm within him again
began to stir in his heart ... perhaps, after all. ...
  Alas, no accident seemed to have occurred to Noboru, who appeared at
about one o’clock. In honor of the occasion, he wore Japanese costume
today—a brown silk kimono with a black twilled-silk coat. His sash was also
of something chic: he was attired as usual in the height of fashion. He
thundered up the staircase to Bunzō’s room, and without a preliminary word
of greeting plopped himself down. He gave Bunzō an extraordinarily
supercilious look, as if he were examining his own nose, and at length
enquired, “What’s the matter? You look as if you’ve been drowned.”
  “I have a little headache.”
  “Is that so? The old lady hasn’t by any chance been giving you a rough
time, has she?”
  This trivial conversation upset Bunzō. He felt somehow offended, but he
was too diffident to say anything.
  “How about it? Sure you won’t go?”
  “I don’t think I will.”
 “Obstinate, aren’t you? It’s because you’re so obstinate that you’d like me
to plead with you to come, isn’t it?” He laughed. “There’s nothing I can do
except laugh to myself. Nothing I say will have any effect on you.” He
barked a laugh.
  After Noboru had spent a few minutes with Bunzō in this vague chatter
which could be termed neither jest nor slander, Osei suddenly called up from
downstairs. “Mr. Honda!”
  “What is it?”
  “The rickshaws have come, so if you’re ready ...”
  “Let’s go.”
  “Hurry then.”
  “Osei?”
  “Yes?”
  “I told them that it would be all right if the two of us rode together, and it’s
arranged that way. You don’t mind, do you?”
  There was no answer, only the sound of feet scampering away.
  “It’s charming how she runs off without answering, isn’t it?” These words
served as Noboru’s final salutation to Bunzō, and with them he went
downstairs. Bunzō, following him with his eyes, muttered bitterly, “The
damned fool!” But even while his voice still wandered in a limbo of its own,
he recalled how Osei looked in the spring when they had gone to see the
cherry blossoms, and he sprang to his feet for no reason. After glaring in all
directions, he finally directed his gaze at the fire pan. He collected his
thoughts again and returned to where he had been sitting. Again he said
bitterly, “The damned fool!” This time he referred to himself.
  In the afternoon a light breeze sprang up, but the weather grew only the
better. What with the fine weather and the fact that it was Sunday, the area
around Dangosaka was so jammed with people out to see the
chrysanthemums that it was scarcely possible to move on the roads. What a
crowd! What a crowd! There were women with their hair done in foreign-
style and in the shimada,1 some in the double-loop coiffure and others in
chignons, girls in the butterfly bun and in bangs. There came Madame X,
secretary to a certain learned society, but said to be really the spook of some
old cat, and Miss Y, whose charmingly minute store of wisdom (of the size
of a mustard seed) was concentrated in her feet, and whose very dreams were
filled with jumping and prancing. There came wet nurses and scullery maids,
fashionable ladies in semiforeign style, and women who looked like living
proofs that polygamy was still being practiced. What a crowd! What a
crowd! Shaven-headed priests had come and long-haired men, men with half-
shaven heads and men with topknots. And they too had come, those beloved
of the gods, the darlings of destiny, the men among men and objects of
universal esteem, those cynosures of envy—I mean they who in days of yore
were called liegemen, but who now are our so-called officials, and who may
in future generations be styled “public servants.” Businessmen came, and the
meek and the humble. There came also exposed politicians, whose principle
is not to look anyone in the face, and who, having forgotten themselves and
their families, seem likely candidates for a prison cell. The whole world had
come. All kinds of faces, hair-dos arranged to suit all kinds of fancies,
costumes and scents of every conceivable description—but I have not the
leisure to describe them all. Besides, the road is so narrow here that the
congestion is quite unbelievable. And in the midst of all this there are some
heartless individuals who ride through the crowd in their rickshaws two
abreast!
   The residents of the neighborhood who, in this glorious age, eke out a
living from day to day by pasting together matchboxes, look up from their
work only long enough to see the flower-viewers, and never do get to see any
real chrysanthemums. When you stop to think of it, it really does take all
sorts to make a world.
   Dangosaka was in a state of the wildest confusion. Flower-sellers stood by
the usual signboards waving the flags of their respective establishments in
the attempt to lure in customers, and the cries of the barkers at every shop
entrance got mingled quite unintelligibly in the autumn wind. In the midst of
the turmoil all one could see were the feverishly shouting faces of the
barkers, who were in the same frantic state no matter how often one looked at
them. Not surprisingly, when one went inside the shops the confusion was
exactly the same as outdoors.
   If we may be permitted a generalization, the chrysanthemum is a flower
which singly gives an impression of loneliness, but when in the thousands
creates a very cheerful effect. Some claim that only when chrysanthemums
are growing in their natural profusion are they worth seeing, and that to see
them displayed on such a lavish scale as at Dangosaka is enough to dampen
one’s enthusiasm for chrysanthemums permanently. Here were massed, with
no semblance of discrimination, yellow and white chrysanthemums, those
flowers which faithfully bloom after all the rest of the fragrant species have
departed. One or two visitors in a thousand might complain of the rather stiff
appearance of the flowers, which looked like overstarched doll’s clothes and
rustled when you touched them, but there was not a single visitor who did not
in fact seem more interested in food than in flowers—alas and alack.
  To the Reader: The above is to be taken as the foolish reflections of a
retired gentleman on viewing the chrysanthemums.
  The Reader: What a bore!
  To return to our story.
  The two rickshaws raced up to Dangosaka and came smartly to a stop.
From the rickshaws then emerged our old friend Noboru, Osei, and her
mother.
  Noboru’s costume was as previously described.
  Omasa wore a sash of black Chinese silk over her gray crepe kimono,
underneath which was visible the border of her underrobe, of black crepe
with a design of some sort sewn in glittering gold thread—a very sensible
outfit.
  Osei wore a yellow kimono with a sash of gray-blue damask filigreed with
gold thread. Underneath, of course, was the customary full-length underrobe
of scarlet crepe, and this was graced with a neckband of pale blue with a
design sewn in gold. The cord of the sash was of pink crepe. In short, she
was elegantly attired.
  However, what caused people to stop and take notice was less Osei’s
clothing than her whole appearance. Although her hair was done up as usual
in a European-style bun, it was so cunningly tied as to suggest that it might
be some rare Japanese style of coiffure, and it was ornamented with a large
hairpin in the shape of a rose. She wore only light make-up, preferring its
simple neatness to the conventional cosmetics which, she said, went against
Nature. Evidently she was all refinement, in character no less than
appearance.
  The envious sightseers who surrounded their party from time to time made
quite audible comments: “They’re sweethearts!” “No, husband and wife!”
These speculations were accompanied by much gaping and pointing, and
with each phrase that came his way Noboru looked the more pleased.
Ostentatiously he paraded the two women through the various exhibits of
chrysanthemums, never letting up his chatter for even an instant. That people
nearby could overhear every word he spoke did not inhibit his usual flow of
gossip.
  Osei also seemed in unusually fine fettle today. There was something
indefinably vivacious in her walk and her carriage and, of course, her
conversation, which rather suggested a little bird who had escaped from its
cage, and her ready wit was in evidence. She laughed ceaselessly, amused by
Noboru’s nonsense, but it was not necessarily because what he said was so
funny. It seemed likely that she would have laughed just the same even had
he remained silent, out of natural high spirits.
  Omasa was exceedingly cool about the chrysanthemums, confining herself
to an occasional “How pretty!” and a vague sweeping glance which made no
attempt to focus on anything. On the other hand she studied with meticulous
attention the appearance of every girl they passed who happened to be about
the same age as Osei. First she would examine the face, then the clothes, the
sash, the feet, and after the girl had gone by, Omasa would turn back for a
final look at her appearance from behind—the sash again, and the hair. This
accomplished, Omasa would dart a glance at Osei from the corner of her eyes
and assume an air of serene composure.
  Noboru’s party visited last the florists’ booths at the foot of the hill. After
examining one after another of the displays, they stopped in front of one
booth. Noboru declared that the face of the doll exhibited there looked
extraordinarily like Bunzō yawning. Osei was highly amused, and delicately
putting one sleeve to her face, leaned over the guardrail, convulsed with
laughter. At this a student standing nearby wheeled around in her direction
and stared through his glasses at Osei in amazement. Even her mother felt
obliged to reprimand Osei for her unbecoming behavior.
  At length Osei controlled her laughter. She lifted her face, still coquettishly
graced with smiles, and looked beside her. Noboru was not there. Startled,
she cast wild glances around her, her expression at once becoming quite
serious.
  Another glance sufficed to reveal to her Noboru, in front of a booth to the
rear, busily engaged in bending his body quite horizontal in repeated
obeisances directed at the back of a gentleman in Western clothes. The
gentleman appeared utterly indifferent to Noboru, and continued for some
time to face the opposite direction. At length, after having been the recipient
of numerous unacknowledged bows, he deigned to turn his bushily
bewhiskered, grumpy face and look at Noboru. Without a trace of a smile,
without even removing his hat, he gave a perfunctory nod, to which Noboru
responded by prostrating himself and making a series of deep reverences,
continuing all the while to pour forth a stream of the usual tedious
compliments.
  Of the two ladies who appeared to be accompanying the gentleman, one
sported a towering coiffure, and the other wore her hair in an elegant,
maidenly bun. They were both exceptionally beautiful and stylish women,
and so well matched that one could not but take them for sisters. Noboru
bowed first to the lady in the lofty chignon. He addressed himself next to the
young lady in the bun, who was so embarrassed that she averted her gaze
when she returned his bow, and blushed.
  It was not possible for Osei to catch the conversation which ensued, for the
other party was at some distance from her and the people about her were
noisy. Whatever it was, a smile never deserted Noboru’s lips as he stood
there chattering, occasionally punctuating his discourse with gestures.
Presently he seemed to have uttered something amusing, for the gentleman
suddenly opened his enormous mouth and began to laugh uproariously, with
much shaking of the shoulders. The lady in the chignon wrinkled the corners
of her mouth as she laughed. The young lady also started to titter, but quickly
hid her mouth with her sleeve. Only her eyes continued to smile as she gazed
demurely at Noboru’s face. Noboru, conscious of an honor too great for his
station, permitted a smile of triumph and contentment to suffuse his entire
face. After waiting for the gentleman’s laughter to subside, he again began to
chatter. Noboru had apparently quite forgotten that Osei and her mother were
waiting.
  Osei paid no attention either to the gentleman or to the distinguished lady,
but she observed the girl in the bun with the minutest, most unwavering,
breathless attention, as if intent on drilling a hole in her with her gaze. She
did not respond even when her mother addressed her.
  Before long the gentleman’s party gave indications of moving towards
where the women stood. Omasa noticed this and frantically tugged at Osei’s
sleeve to rouse her from her trance. They quickly stepped forward to the path
to meet Noboru, who came up a few minutes later with the gentleman. At the
wicket he again bowed slightly and, politely, affably, loquaciously, recited
suitable farewells to each of them. After they had departed he took two or
three tentative steps by himself. An expression, as of sudden recollection,
crossed his face, and he gazed around him in consternation.
   “Mr. Honda, we’re here.”
   Noboru, hearing Omasa’s voice, hurried to the two ladies. “Sorry to have
kept you waiting.”
   “Who was that?”
   “That was the chief of my department,” he answered smiling broadly, for
whatever reason. “I didn’t expect them to come today.”
   “Is the lady in the chignon his wife?”
   “Yes, she is.”
   “And the one in the bun?”
   “Oh, she? She’s ...” he began, turned back for another look, and added,
“the younger sister of the department head’s wife. She looks much prettier
than when I saw her at their house.”
   “Yes, I suppose you might call her pretty, but it’s all in the clothes, isn’t
it?”
   “Today she’s dressed up like a little lady, but when she’s at home she
wears the most nondescript clothes, and they treat her like a servant.”
   “Has she had an education?” Osei suddenly asked.
   Noboru was perplexed. “I’ve never heard anything about that ... but she
may very well be educated, for all I know. She’s only just come to live at my
department head’s house, and I really don’t know very much about her yet.”
   At these words Osei turned around abruptly and, with a derisive expression
in her eyes, stared at the young lady, who was about to enter a florist’s booth
halfway down the hill. Osei patted her sash in a moment of nervousness, but
quickly regained her composure.
   After they had got into rickshaws which were to take them next to Ueno
Park, Omasa remarked to Osei, who rode with her, “You should have worn
make-up like that girl.”
   “I hate it, all that heavy paint.”
  “But why?”
  “It’s so unpleasant.”
  “But you’re still in your teens. It isn’t the least unpleasant if you wear it. I
can’t tell you how much better it looks. It’s so much more striking.”
  “If you like it so much, Mama, you should wear it yourself. It’s funny the
way you keep on saying how good it is when I tell you I hate it.”
  “All I meant to say is that I think it’s nice, and I’m surprised you don’t.
You really are a funny girl to answer me back like that.”
  Osei appeared to have recognized that verbal attacks had already ceased to
be necessary, and did not utter another word. Without being exactly
dispirited or downcast, she had somehow become pensive. Her mother tried
to patch together the fragments of the conversation, but Osei would not be
her partner in this attempt. This odd situation lasted almost until they had
reached Ueno Park, where Osei began to talk again and was more of her old
self.





STORY ANALYSIS:



In spite of the varying reactions to The Essence of the Novel (Shosetsu shinzui,
1885–86) by Tsubouchi Shoyo (1859–1935), literary historians generally agree
that it is the first work that called for the production of the modern novel. It is
considered the manifesto of modern Japanese literature, and Shoyo the founder
of that institution. Defining the shosetsu (novel) as a work of art, it marks the be-
ginning of modern literature, and its originary status is now rarely questioned.
    In fact, however, there is a significant gap in modern Japanese literary his-
tory. By virtue of its reputation as the origin of modern Japanese literature,
everything that preceded The Essence of the Novel is too often designated as the
“premodern.” The emergence of this seminal text is valorized to such an extent
that The Essence of the Novel seems to have been produced in a vacuum. This
work did not grow out of a vacuum; it is very much a product of its own histori-
cal moment, shaped by the chaotic contingencies of Japan’s age of moderniza-
tion.
    Shoyo’s endeavor is often narrated in terms of “Western influence,” arguing
that he urged his peers to emulate the “superior” literary practices of the West
while discarding the “inferior” literature of Japan such as gesaku fiction (com-
monly translated as “frivolous” or playful writings, referring to a genre that pro-
liferated in the Edo and early Meiji periods). This type of narrative is still domi-
nant among most literary scholars; in fact, The Essence of the Novel is still
known for its criticism of gesaku, most notably of Takizawa Bakin’s (1767–1848)


works. Yet this characterization is too simplistic when we turn our attention to
the chaotic space of production of The Essence of the Novel.
    The chaos is clearly inscribed in the central entity taken up in the text,
namely the shosetsu. Although the term shosetsu is now a standard translation of
the word “novel” (or “novels”), the relationship between the two terms was by
no means a given at the historical time in which Shoyo wrote. Despite the fact
that numerous Western texts were translated in the early years of Meiji, it was
not until the second decade (1878–88) that novels began to be translated. (See
“Translated and Political Novels.”) The basic configuration of the Western
novel was far from clear to Shoyo and to his contemporaries. We must not be
misled by the translation of the title of Shoyo’s work into uncritically equating
shosetsu and the novel. Shoyo creates and configures a new literary form, the
shosetsu, in the textual realm of his essay.
    As a theoretical work, The Essence of the Novel discusses a variety of topics,
ranging from themes and types of shosetsu to the technical aspects of writing
shosetsu, such as the styles of language to employ, and how to configure a pro-
tagonist. The most famous section is entitled “The Main Theme of Shosetsu”
(Shosetsu no shugan), which is often considered to be Shoyo’s most notable
contribution to the development of modern Japanese literature. In it, he claims
that shosetsu should thematize human emotions, focusing on the inner struggle
of humanity. In fact, in comparison with this section, the other sections of The
Essence of the Novel are devalued, often dismissed as a reflection of Shoyo’s not-
yet-modernized sensibility. The kindai jiga (modern selfhood), the most no-
table canonical theme of subsequent works of modern Japanese fiction, thus
finds its origin retrospectively in The Essence of the Novel.
    Shoyo attempted to actualize his theory in an experimental fictional work
entitled Characters of Modern Students (Tosei shosei katagi, 1885). Yet he him-
self later reflected that the work was a failure, and the overwhelming majority of
critics follow his evaluation. Readers did not have to wait too long, however, for
the appearance of the “true” novel, for Shoyo’s disciple, Hasegawa Tatsunosuke
(1864–1909)—better known by his pen name, Futabatei Shimei—began to pub-
lish Drifting Clouds (Ukigumo) in 1887. Published initially under Shoyo’s name
because he was the more famous of the two, Drifting Clouds marks a significant
moment in the history of modern Japanese literature; it is even now considered
Japan’s first modern novel.
    The narrative content of Drifting Clouds is relatively easy to summarize: the
protagonist Utsumi Bunzo, a failed public servant, struggles internally with his
love for his cousin Osei, continually trying to deduce her feelings for him. He is
in torment when she appears to take a liking to his former colleague Noboru, a
shrewd and practical man who has the social skills necessary for success in the
risshin shusse (achievement-oriented) world of Meiji Japan, social skills that
Bunzo lacks. The story remains unresolved, not only because the work is in-

complete but also because of Bunzo’s complete inability to make an active
move to change his miserable state of affairs.
    From this summary it may be hard to fathom the reasons behind Drifting
Clouds’ status in the history of modern Japanese literature. The novel’s reputa-
tion rests on two important characteristics. First, its protagonist, Bunzo, is the
quintessential antihero, an intellectual whose interiority is the main object of
the story. Bunzo in many ways actualizes Shoyo’s claim that the shosetsu should
feature internal human sufferings. Second, its narrative is written in *gen-
bun’itchi—commonly translated as “the unification of spoken and written lan-
guages”—the “modern language” of the new nation. Recent critical works such
as those of Karatani Kojin and Komori Yoichi have questioned the characteriza-
tion of Drifting Clouds as the first and most successful example of the modern
novel. Nonetheless, the emphasis on the protagonist’s interiority as well as a
story centering on the love relationship between Bunzo and his cousin Osei had
a considerable impact on the literary scene.
    Drifting Clouds had an important impact on Shoyo as well, who, after read-
ing Futabatei’s work, decided to forgo writing novels altogether. Although he is
most known in literary history for The Essence of the Novel, he wrote several
novels after Characters of Modern Students, including Mirrors of Marriage
(Imotose kagami, 1886) and The Wife (Saikun, 1889), in an effort to overcome
the failure of his first experiment. After his encounter with Futabatei’s work,
however, Shoyo, in retrospect, claimed that Drifting Clouds was the kind of
novel he had aspired to write; he thereupon changed his career to that of liter-
ary critic, dramatist, and translator (known especially for his translations of
Shakespeare’s plays, which are still the standard). Though he had devalued
drama considerably in his Essence of the Novel, Shoyo later devoted consider-
able effort in the reform of Japanese drama.
    Futabatei Shimei’s Drifting Clouds came out in several installments, often
with long lapses in between. Struggling to produce a new narrative form,
Futabatei’s endeavor with his first work by no means went smoothly. He experi-
mented with his writing to produce a satisfying language with which to write a
modern narrative. He turned to Russian in his experiments; he was sufficiently
well versed in the language to write his first draft in Russian and then translate
his own narrative back into Japanese. The longest lapse in publication of Drift-
ing Clouds was between parts II and III (1888–89), during which time he pub-
lished two famous translations of Turgenev’s works, namely “The Rendezvous”
(Aibiki, 1850) and “Three Meetings” (Meguriai, 1851). In order to produce a
modern narrative form in Drifting Clouds, he sought to emulate the narrating
subjects of these two works.
    Like many of his contemporaries, Futabatei was also a theorist, as is evident
from his famous essay “Comprehensive Theory of the Shosetsu” (Shosetsu
soron, 1886), which analyzed techniques of portrayal that were drawn from Rus-
sian theorists, most notably Vissarion Belinsky. His ideas were actualized in
many ways in Drifting Clouds, though he ended its publication in 1889 pre-
cisely because his own writing disillusioned him. It was not until 1906 that he
wrote another fictional work of his own, The Image (Sono omokage), which was
followed by Mediocrity (Heibon) in 1907. These two works fared well in the
*naturalist trend that dominated the literary scene of the day, to the extent that
they are now considered works of naturalist fiction.
    Both Shoyo and Futabatei were writers who negotiated the turmoil of mod-
ernization in their search for new narrative configurations. In many ways their
careers as translators played a significant role in their linguistic experiments. For
them, in writing a shosetsu the issue was not only what to write but also how to
write. They lived in an era when the Japanese language was visibly heteroge-
neous and dispersed. (See “The Problem of the Modern Subject.”) The phrase
“Western influence,” too often used to characterize their efforts to produce a
modern shosetsu, does not do justice to the complexity of their endeavors and
the chaotic literary era within which they lived.
                                                                       —Atsuko Ueda