Chapter Title: TSUBOUCHI SHŌYŌ AND FUTABATEI SHIMEI
Chapter Author(s): Atsuko Ueda

Book Title: The Columbia Companion to Modern East Asian Literature
Book Editor(s): Joshua S. Mostow, Kirk A. Denton, Bruce Fulton and Sharalyn Orbaugh
Published by: Columbia University Press

Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7312/most11314.11

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms




            Columbia University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
            to The Columbia Companion to Modern East Asian Literature




                                                    This content downloaded from
                                  130.64.11.161 on Mon, 31 Jul 2023 07:41:00 +00:00
                                            All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                              9

       tsubouchi shōyō and futabatei shimei




In spite of the varying reactions to The Essence of the Novel (Shosetsu shinzui,
1885–86) by Tsubouchi Shoyo (1859–1935), literary historians generally agree
that it is the first work that called for the production of the modern novel. It is
considered the manifesto of modern Japanese literature, and Shoyo the founder
of that institution. Defining the shosetsu (novel) as a work of art, it marks the be-
ginning of modern literature, and its originary status is now rarely questioned.
    In fact, however, there is a significant gap in modern Japanese literary his-
tory. By virtue of its reputation as the origin of modern Japanese literature,
everything that preceded The Essence of the Novel is too often designated as the
“premodern.” The emergence of this seminal text is valorized to such an extent
that The Essence of the Novel seems to have been produced in a vacuum. This
work did not grow out of a vacuum; it is very much a product of its own histori-
cal moment, shaped by the chaotic contingencies of Japan’s age of moderniza-
tion.
    Shoyo’s endeavor is often narrated in terms of “Western influence,” arguing
that he urged his peers to emulate the “superior” literary practices of the West
while discarding the “inferior” literature of Japan such as gesaku fiction (com-
monly translated as “frivolous” or playful writings, referring to a genre that pro-
liferated in the Edo and early Meiji periods). This type of narrative is still domi-
nant among most literary scholars; in fact, The Essence of the Novel is still
known for its criticism of gesaku, most notably of Takizawa Bakin’s (1767–1848)




                           This content downloaded from
         130.64.11.161 on Mon, 31 Jul 2023 07:41:00 +00:00
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                      Tsubouchi Shoyo and Futabatei Shimei     63

works. Yet this characterization is too simplistic when we turn our attention to
the chaotic space of production of The Essence of the Novel.
    The chaos is clearly inscribed in the central entity taken up in the text,
namely the shosetsu. Although the term shosetsu is now a standard translation of
the word “novel” (or “novels”), the relationship between the two terms was by
no means a given at the historical time in which Shoyo wrote. Despite the fact
that numerous Western texts were translated in the early years of Meiji, it was
not until the second decade (1878–88) that novels began to be translated. (See
“Translated and Political Novels.”) The basic configuration of the Western
novel was far from clear to Shoyo and to his contemporaries. We must not be
misled by the translation of the title of Shoyo’s work into uncritically equating
shosetsu and the novel. Shoyo creates and configures a new literary form, the
shosetsu, in the textual realm of his essay.
    As a theoretical work, The Essence of the Novel discusses a variety of topics,
ranging from themes and types of shosetsu to the technical aspects of writing
shosetsu, such as the styles of language to employ, and how to configure a pro-
tagonist. The most famous section is entitled “The Main Theme of Shosetsu”
(Shosetsu no shugan), which is often considered to be Shoyo’s most notable
contribution to the development of modern Japanese literature. In it, he claims
that shosetsu should thematize human emotions, focusing on the inner struggle
of humanity. In fact, in comparison with this section, the other sections of The
Essence of the Novel are devalued, often dismissed as a reflection of Shoyo’s not-
yet-modernized sensibility. The kindai jiga (modern selfhood), the most no-
table canonical theme of subsequent works of modern Japanese fiction, thus
finds its origin retrospectively in The Essence of the Novel.
    Shoyo attempted to actualize his theory in an experimental fictional work
entitled Characters of Modern Students (Tosei shosei katagi, 1885). Yet he him-
self later reflected that the work was a failure, and the overwhelming majority of
critics follow his evaluation. Readers did not have to wait too long, however, for
the appearance of the “true” novel, for Shoyo’s disciple, Hasegawa Tatsunosuke
(1864–1909)—better known by his pen name, Futabatei Shimei—began to pub-
lish Drifting Clouds (Ukigumo) in 1887. Published initially under Shoyo’s name
because he was the more famous of the two, Drifting Clouds marks a significant
moment in the history of modern Japanese literature; it is even now considered
Japan’s first modern novel.
    The narrative content of Drifting Clouds is relatively easy to summarize: the
protagonist Utsumi Bunzo, a failed public servant, struggles internally with his
love for his cousin Osei, continually trying to deduce her feelings for him. He is
in torment when she appears to take a liking to his former colleague Noboru, a
shrewd and practical man who has the social skills necessary for success in the
risshin shusse (achievement-oriented) world of Meiji Japan, social skills that
Bunzo lacks. The story remains unresolved, not only because the work is in-




                                This content downloaded from
              130.64.11.161 on Mon, 31 Jul 2023 07:41:00 +00:00
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
64       Tsubouchi Shoyo and Futabatei Shimei

complete but also because of Bunzo’s complete inability to make an active
move to change his miserable state of affairs.
    From this summary it may be hard to fathom the reasons behind Drifting
Clouds’ status in the history of modern Japanese literature. The novel’s reputa-
tion rests on two important characteristics. First, its protagonist, Bunzo, is the
quintessential antihero, an intellectual whose interiority is the main object of
the story. Bunzo in many ways actualizes Shoyo’s claim that the shosetsu should
feature internal human sufferings. Second, its narrative is written in *gen-
bun’itchi—commonly translated as “the unification of spoken and written lan-
guages”—the “modern language” of the new nation. Recent critical works such
as those of Karatani Kojin and Komori Yoichi have questioned the characteriza-
tion of Drifting Clouds as the first and most successful example of the modern
novel. Nonetheless, the emphasis on the protagonist’s interiority as well as a
story centering on the love relationship between Bunzo and his cousin Osei had
a considerable impact on the literary scene.
    Drifting Clouds had an important impact on Shoyo as well, who, after read-
ing Futabatei’s work, decided to forgo writing novels altogether. Although he is
most known in literary history for The Essence of the Novel, he wrote several
novels after Characters of Modern Students, including Mirrors of Marriage
(Imotose kagami, 1886) and The Wife (Saikun, 1889), in an effort to overcome
the failure of his first experiment. After his encounter with Futabatei’s work,
however, Shoyo, in retrospect, claimed that Drifting Clouds was the kind of
novel he had aspired to write; he thereupon changed his career to that of liter-
ary critic, dramatist, and translator (known especially for his translations of
Shakespeare’s plays, which are still the standard). Though he had devalued
drama considerably in his Essence of the Novel, Shoyo later devoted consider-
able effort in the reform of Japanese drama.
    Futabatei Shimei’s Drifting Clouds came out in several installments, often
with long lapses in between. Struggling to produce a new narrative form,
Futabatei’s endeavor with his first work by no means went smoothly. He experi-
mented with his writing to produce a satisfying language with which to write a
modern narrative. He turned to Russian in his experiments; he was sufficiently
well versed in the language to write his first draft in Russian and then translate
his own narrative back into Japanese. The longest lapse in publication of Drift-
ing Clouds was between parts II and III (1888–89), during which time he pub-
lished two famous translations of Turgenev’s works, namely “The Rendezvous”
(Aibiki, 1850) and “Three Meetings” (Meguriai, 1851). In order to produce a
modern narrative form in Drifting Clouds, he sought to emulate the narrating
subjects of these two works.
    Like many of his contemporaries, Futabatei was also a theorist, as is evident
from his famous essay “Comprehensive Theory of the Shosetsu” (Shosetsu
soron, 1886), which analyzed techniques of portrayal that were drawn from Rus-
sian theorists, most notably Vissarion Belinsky. His ideas were actualized in




                           This content downloaded from
         130.64.11.161 on Mon, 31 Jul 2023 07:41:00 +00:00
                   All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                       Tsubouchi Shoyo and Futabatei Shimei       65

many ways in Drifting Clouds, though he ended its publication in 1889 pre-
cisely because his own writing disillusioned him. It was not until 1906 that he
wrote another fictional work of his own, The Image (Sono omokage), which was
followed by Mediocrity (Heibon) in 1907. These two works fared well in the
*naturalist trend that dominated the literary scene of the day, to the extent that
they are now considered works of naturalist fiction.
    Both Shoyo and Futabatei were writers who negotiated the turmoil of mod-
ernization in their search for new narrative configurations. In many ways their
careers as translators played a significant role in their linguistic experiments. For
them, in writing a shosetsu the issue was not only what to write but also how to
write. They lived in an era when the Japanese language was visibly heteroge-
neous and dispersed. (See “The Problem of the Modern Subject.”) The phrase
“Western influence,” too often used to characterize their efforts to produce a
modern shosetsu, does not do justice to the complexity of their endeavors and
the chaotic literary era within which they lived.
                                                                       —Atsuko Ueda



                                      Bibliography

Futabatei Shimei. Mediocrity. Trans. Glenn W. Shaw. Tokyo: Hokuseido, 1927.
Karatani Kojin. Origins of Modern Japanese Literature. Trans. Brett de Bary. Durham,
   N.C.: Duke University Press, 1993.
Komori Yoichi. Buntai toshite no monogatari (Monogatari As Literary Style). Tokyo:
   Chikuma, 1998.
Ryan, Marleigh Grayer. Japan’s First Modern Novel: “Ukigumo” of Futabatei Shimei.
   New York: Columbia University Press, 1967.
Tsubouchi Shoyo. “The Essence of the Novel.” Trans. Nanette Twine. Occasional Pa-
   pers 11. Department of Japanese, University of Queensland, 1981.




                                 This content downloaded from
               130.64.11.161 on Mon, 31 Jul 2023 07:41:00 +00:00
                         All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
